Let's add more stuff here.
So we kind of have a problem.
I don't like that I can
just like edit the serial
number on my car here
like hang it goes to Den.
SerialNumber=-123, that seems bad.
We shouldn't be able to mess with
serial numbers on these cars.
So what we're gonna do is
we're gonna make that serial
number private and
we're going to define a getter for it.
So here we go.
So these are the new lines here, okay?
So what we have here and
I have to delete this line in a sec, but
I just want to leave it for
comparison's sake.
What we have here is a new property
that we're saying is private.
Private means only instances of
this class can view this field.
If I created a subclass,
l would not be able to see this field.
It's only this class itself.
Protected means subclasses can see it too,
but
the outside world cannot see it.
Just cause you created a car and
you have a variable called my car.
That doesn't give you a right
to access the serial number.
So if I delete this or comment it out,
great, I've got this private field,
at least it's a TypeScript private field
still generating the serial number.
And then I created this getter
which will let, for example,
this work, but I won't be able in
subclasses to do something like,
That, it's a read-only property.
There's only a getter for it.
So this is an example of us using access
modifier key words like private and
protected to sort of store information
with one level of access private.
And then expose it in a controlled way,
with another another level
of access protected.
So like we can store it,
no one can see it but
we are no one can write to it or
read to it and
then we can deliberately open up
a door that lets subclasses read it.
But the outside public
cannot sit down here,
this is it's not accessible
from the outside.
You can create static, private,
and protected fields as well.
So we're gonna use this
to kind of lock down
the serial number generation up here.
Really I'm just gonna add the static,
sorry,
the private keyword to both of these.
And this is kind of interesting because,
we were thinking about private and
protected as pertaining to
instances of the class.
The mental model still
holds true with one caveat.
If you think about, like,
a car as having this static side,
this stuff up here, and
then there are instances,
private and protected still
behave the way you would expect.
In static areas of this class,
I can access private static stuff.
In this instance, I can access private
instance stuff and private static stuff.
That's what lets me have
access to this function here.
This is instance stuff
that's happening here.
There's no static keyword, right I
could say same as in here like I do or
car generate serial number, no problem.
If I were to change these to
protected then subclasses on their
static side can access it,
as well as on their instance side.
So really think about it
as a two-dimensional thing.
There's static and instance, and
then there's private and protected.
Private and protected relate to, like,
only this class, none of its subclasses.
And then protected opens
it up to subclasses.
And then there's one more but
it's implied like you don't need
an access modifier keyword for this.
You could say public like this.
But everything's public by default.
Unless you say otherwise.
>> Two quick questions.
One, the underscore naming convention
is just a naming convention, correct?
>> It is a naming convention,
but I've done it for a reason.
And that is, you have to remember,
TypeScript melts away at build time.
It checks your code and
then it says, I'm done, good luck.
I'm going home.
So, if you were at runtime,
you would still see this field here.
It doesn't actually prevent other
code from accessing this field.
If you were to open up
a JavaScript console.
And you were dealing with a deployed
website with this code in it, you would be
able to see underscore serial number, and
you'd be able to write to it as well.
It's just sort of something to help keep
you honest within your own code base.
So, leaving an underscore there is
important to give you a clue if
you're ever, looking at a log file or
something like that.
Or you've attached a debugger to
a running version of the app, and
you're dealing with something in
a console, like you still want to leave
yourself an indication that this
is not supposed to be public.
But it's just kind of
a statement of intention and
it's sort of,
the honesty policy in that it's
designed to help you, don't defeat it.
There are ways now of making
fields actually private,
which we will talk about later in
this chapter that we're on right now.
I see there's a question in
the chat about hashtag fields.
We will talk about that that's
exactly where we're headed.
>> And the other question was just about
the implicit getter, not needing a type,
because it can be inferred from
the class property, on line 23 there.
>> It's inferred from
the return type here.
So unfortunately, if we did this,
I'm gonna follow my own advice, do that.
Yeah, return types are inferred.
It's a good idea to add
the return type here.
Okay, onwards we go.
So we talked about static blocks.
We talked about the access modifier
keywords on member fields,
which are instance fields,
and on static fields.
You can see now I can't just call
car.generateSerialNumber from
the outside anymore.
That is private.
Even subclasses won't be able to get that.
They'll be able to access their own serial
number because there's that getter,
but they won't be able to
generate a serial number.
That happens in the base class and
stays there.
All right, JavaScript private fields.
So the access modifier keywords
like private and protected.
Predate actual private fields that landed
in Javascript relatively recently.
In the spirit of continuing
to evolve our example,
let's take our serial number field and
make it instead of like
typescript private,
which is just like the honor system.
Let's make it actually private.
So we're gonna go up here and
I can get rid of my underscore here
because it doesn't really matter.
I don't need an indication
of what this should be.
I'm just gonna literally change
its name to begin with, a hashtag.
And that denotes that
this is a private field.
I'm getting yelled at by TypeScript
because it's like, this is private.
This is private.
You don't need to tell me.
It supersedes the honor system here.
This is actually difficult
to access at runtime.
And here you can see we have
access to hashtag serial number.
But we won't be able to access it
from outside the class like this.
There's my car.
This is not accessible outside the class.
And this will match, like if you were
to open up Chrome DevTools or attach
a debugger to a running Node program, you
would see that this is for sure private.
Now, it's private in terms of
encapsulation, but you should remember,
if you attach a debugger, if your
code is running somewhere that users
have access to, they can attach
a debugger and they can view this field.
Don't put anything here
that's actually a secret.
It's not private in that sense.
Chrome DevTools has an API that you
can use to just grab private fields.
It's not secure, it's just private.
All right, we could use this for static
fields as well, I'm just gonna up top and
make the modification similarly.
So we're gonna take the private
static fields, get rid of this.
And do this and
we need to update this and
this should be good.
One more, see I should have
used the like f2 to rename and
it would have taken care of everything.
All right so now we have
legitimately like, actually private.
Static fields, static methods,
they cannot be accessed.
Even once this compiles to JavaScript,
they are still private.
As opposed to this, which is just,
it'll compile away and
the getter will be there for
all to see and all to access.
It's important when you think about
libraries in particular because
people can just like ignore that type and
just call the getter anyway and
they'll get the value, right?
And they'll depend on that.
It's not really a security issue.
It's more like they will start
to depend on that thing and
now, they'll break if
that thing ever changes.
So we talked about static fields, great.
Okay, this is really cool.
Private field presence checks.
So we're gonna take advantage of something
really cool here about private fields.
So I'm gonna grab this =method.
We'll drop it into the class and
then we'll talk about it.
Okay, so
we've defined a method called equals.
And the purpose of this is we want
to see whether I obtain a car,
I want to see if I am
equal to this other car.
Now, we could do it with an instance of.
We could do it with checking for
properties, like say, does my structure.
Look like it's a car, but we're gonna
take advantage of something else.
We're gonna take advantage of this
private field presence check.
What this means is if we are given
other paths to us is of type car.
We're able to access it.
So this is important in terms of
understanding how private fields work.
It's not that this instance can
see that instance's private data,
it's that all instances of CAR can see
private data on all other instances.
So here, through typeguards, we first say,
all right, if this value passed to us,
we can start with this, just to not
throw you for a loop with unknown.
If it is truthy, meaning it's not null,
it's undefined, and it is an object type.
Well, now we know it could
have properties on it.
And so what we can do then
is a private field presence
check where we say is
serial number in other and
if it is, guess what we know it's a car.
The very fact that we're
able to determine.
So that field is there,
and it's a private field,
the only way we'd be able to do that is if
it's another instance of the same class.
So we know for sure that this is a car,
otherwise we would not be able to.
We wouldn't be allowed to even
know if a serial number exists.
You could have another class like
Computer class called computer.
Computers have serial numbers too but
you wouldn't be able to see this you
wouldn't be able to ascertain whether that
serial number that you're looking for
see car.#serialNumber.
It's the one that you have it's
the field on your class not just
the name serial number, but
specifically a field that you can access.
The fact that you can see that
means this is for sure a car.
And that's why this guard here
takes you from any straight to car.
And now for our equality check we can
actually compare serial numbers and
we can see.
Am I a car?
Are you a car?
So this teaches us a couple of things.
One is that if we're given
a reference to another car,
we can see all of the private
fields on that thing.
It's not a little bubble
around each instance.
It's kind of above all,
that all instances share.
And within that bubble, they can access
each other's private data as long as they
have references to each other so
they can reach for it.
So that's how you want
to think about this.
And then finally,
this private field presence check.
We talked a little bit about type guards.
This is a prime type guard.
We'll talk more in the next chapter about
user defined type cards where you can
write your own.
This is one of the most solid ones,
but it is a little bit nominal
type system ish,
because it's legitimately checking.
Are you an instance of car that's
the only way you'd be able to
see that private field?
Dimitar, I think I answered
your question just now.
If another object has a serial number too,
and
I'm gonna assume you mean like
an instance of a different class
has hashtag serial number that
is a different serial number.
Like if we had this.
Right, when you get to this check,
inside this instance of Car,
you're not allowed to read this,
you're not allowed to know it exists.
So this condition would fail.
And the fact that it passes it means
not only is there a private field with
this name, but is it specifically
the private field that you can access?
And that's how we know it must be a car.
Hopefully that makes sense.
It's a pretty powerful idea though.
It also makes private fields like much
more useful because you can share
data amongst each other.
If you couldn't do that, it would be kind
of very limited in terms of usefulness.
All right,
one more access modifier key word here.
We've used it already.
It's called read only.
We can make this change really quick, but
we could make that serial
number a read-only field.
So now it's a private field that
is set when it's initialized and
we cannot change it after it is set.
Remember this is also a type
script construct at runtime
if you had misbehaving code that
casts this to another type,
they will be able to write to this.
That's bad TypeScript code if
it's like casting away read-only.
So, it's just an expression of
what you want this to be used for.
Actually, in this case, since you can't
access this from the outside world,
you could be pretty confident that
no one would be able to change this.
You could have a method in
here that changes that but
you're telling yourself at that point.
Yep, someone caught a bug.
She'd be triple equals, and guess what?
The read-only just caught that.
We'll pretend I left that in there as
a bug so that when I added that step,
it worked out perfectly